Reference: D’Bastiani, E., Princepe, D., Campião, K. M., Marquitti, F. M., Boeger, W. A., & Araujo, S. L. (2022). Effect of host-switching on the ecological and evolutionary patterns of parasites. bioRxiv.

Abstract: Speciation via host-switching is a macroevolutionary process that emerges from a microevolutionary dynamic where parasite individuals switch hosts, establish a new association, and reduce the reproductive contact with the original parasite lineage. Phylogenetic distance and geographic distribution of the hosts have been shown to be determinants of the capacity and opportunity of the parasite to change hosts. Although speciation via host-switching has been reported in many host-parasite systems, its dynamics on a microevolutionary scale (where not all parasite switches result in speciation) is poorly understood. Here, we proposed a theoretical model to investigate how the intensity of host-switching on the microevolutionary scale affects the ecological and evolutionary patterns of the parasites in empirical communities on local and regional scales. In the model, parasite individuals can switch hosts under variable intensity and have their evolution driven by mutation and genetic drift. Mating is sexual and only individuals that are sufficiently similar can produce offspring. We assumed that parasite evolution occurs at the same evolutionary time scale as their hosts, and that the intensity of host-switching decreases as the host species differentiate. Ecological and evolutionary patterns were characterised by the turnover of parasite species among host species, and parasite evolutionary tree imbalance respectively. We found a range of host-switching intensity that reproduces ecological and evolutionary patterns observed in empirical communities. Our results showed that the turnover decreased as the host-switching intensity increased, with low variation among the model replications. Tree imbalance, on the other hand, showed wide variation and non-monotonic tendency. We concluded that tree imbalance was sensitive to stochastic events, whereas turnover may be a good indicator of host-switching. We found that local empirical communities corresponded to higher host-switching intensity when compared to regional communities, highlighting that spatial scale is a limitation for host-switching.

